Add dbt Wizard MCP and subagents docs (#9290)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-mcp.md

The <Constant name="wizard"/> CLI lets you add, remove, authenticate, and customize MCP servers (including managing them and setting per-tool approvals) through the `config.toml` file.

:::info MCP servers are a CLI feature
Configuring MCP servers is available only in the <Constant name="wizard" /> CLI. Although you're not able to configure your own MCP servers in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> (<Constant name="studio_ide" /> and the home app), <Constant name="wizard" /> includes a built-in set of dbt tools such as dbt Agent skill and dbt MCP's product documentation fetching.
:::

## Supported MCP server types

<Constant name="wizard" /> supports two transports and reads server-provided instructions:

<SimpleTable>

| Type | Description |
|------|-------------|
| STDIO server (standard input/output, a server that runs as a program on your own computer, instead of one you connect to over the internet) | Runs as a local process that <Constant name="wizard"/> starts with a command (for example, `npx` or `uvx`). Supports environment variables. |
| Streamable HTTP server | A server you reach at a URL. Supports bearer-token and OAuth authentication. |

> | Server instructions | <Constant name="wizard"/> reads the `instructions` field a server returns during initialization and uses it as cross-tool guidance. |

Reviewer: Could this be a note in this section versus on the table?

Server instructions isn't a transport type so it might be confusing

<SimpleTable>

| Key | Applies to | Description |
|-----|-----------|-------------|
| `command` | STDIO | The command that launches the server (for example, `uvx` or `npx`). |
| `args` | STDIO | Array of arguments passed to `command`. |
| `env` | STDIO | Table of environment variables set when launching the server. |
| `env_vars` | STDIO | Names of existing environment variables to pass through to the server. |
| `url` | HTTP | The server endpoint for a streamable HTTP server. |
| `bearer_token_env_var` | HTTP | Name of the environment variable to read a bearer token from. Sent as `Authorization: Bearer TOKEN`. |
| `http_headers` | HTTP | Table of static HTTP headers to send with each request. |
| `env_http_headers` | HTTP | HTTP headers whose values are read from environment variables. |
| `enabled` | Both | Whether the server is active. Defaults to `true`. |
| `required` | Both | When `true`, `wizard exec` errors if this server fails to initialize. |
| `enabled_tools` | Both | Allowlist of tool names to expose from the server. |
| `disabled_tools` | Both | Blocklist of tool names to hide from the server. |

> | `default_tools_approval_mode` | Both | Default approval mode for this server's tools (`auto`, `prompt`, or `approve`). |

Reviewer: `auto`/`approve` are functionally the same I think, is that worth calling out? also can leave as is

| `tool_timeout_sec` | Both | How long to wait for an individual tool call. |

</SimpleTable>

Set per-tool approvals with a `[mcp_servers.NAME.tools.TOOL_NAME]` block and an `approval_mode` of `auto`, `prompt`, or `approve`:

```toml
[mcp_servers.github.tools.create_pull_request]
approval_mode = "approve"
```

## Authenticate a server

For streamable HTTP servers that use OAuth, authenticate from the CLI:

```bash
wizard mcp login SERVER_NAME
wizard mcp logout SERVER_NAME
```

For servers that use a static token, set `bearer_token_env_var` to the name of an environment variable holding the token, and export that variable before starting `wizard`.

## Manage MCP servers (CLI)

Inspecting and removing servers is done through the <Constant name="wizard" /> CLI:

<SimpleTable>

| Command | What it does |
|---------|-------------|
| `wizard mcp list` | List configured MCP servers. Add `--json` for machine-readable output. |
| `wizard mcp get NAME` | Show the configuration for one server. |
| `wizard mcp add NAME ...` | Add a STDIO or streamable HTTP server. |
| `wizard mcp remove NAME` | Remove a server's configuration. |

> | `wizard mcp login NAME` | Authenticate with an OAuth server. |

Reviewer: Could we get `scopes`, `oauth.client_id`, and `oauth_resource` fields documented here too? 🙏

Reviewer: e.g. `--scopes` flag

Reviewer: Maybe adding to "Configuration Keys"?

(and pls reword, you are much better at technical writing 🙏 )

All are for HTTP transport.
`scopes` Array of OAuth scopes and overrides discovered scopes.
`oauth.client_id` OAuth client identifier for auth and token exchange
`oauth_resource` Resource parameter to include in requests

---
title: "Use MCP servers with dbt Wizard"
id: "wizard-mcp"
description: "Connect dbt Wizard to MCP servers to give it more tools and context — in the dbt platform or the CLI."
sidebar_label: "Use MCP servers"
tags: [AI, Wizard]
---

import WizardFeedbackCallout from '/snippets/_wizard-feedback-callout.md';

# Use MCP servers with <Constant name="wizard"/> <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

<IntroText>

> The Model Context Protocol (MCP) connects <Constant name="wizard" /> to external tools and context. Add an MCP server and <Constant name="wizard"/> can call its tools mid-session — query the dbt MCP server for governed project metadata, open a pull request through the GitHub MCP server, or pull in any other MCP-compatible service.

Author: ```suggestion
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) connects <Constant name="wizard" /> to external tools and context. Add an MCP server and <Constant name="wizard"/> can call its tools mid-session &mdash; query the dbt MCP server for governed project metadata, open a pull request through the GitHub MCP server, or pull in any other MCP-compatible service.
```

</IntroText>

<WizardFeedbackCallout />

For background on MCP itself, refer to the [Model Context Protocol introduction](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction). For the dbt-maintained server specifically, refer to the [dbt MCP server](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

## Where you can use MCP servers

> Out of the box, <Constant name="wizard"/> understands your dbt project. An MCP server extends that reach to the other tools and systems your work depends on, so you can do more without leaving your session. Each server you add gives <Constant name="wizard"/> a new set of tools it can call on your behalf — for example:

Author: ```suggestion
<Constant name="wizard"/> natively understands your dbt project, and having an MCP server extends that reach to the other tools and systems your work depends on, so you can do more without leaving your session. Each server you add gives <Constant name="wizard"/> a new set of tools it can call on your behalf. For example:
```

---
title: "Use MCP servers with the dbt Wizard CLI"
id: "wizard-mcp"
description: "Connect the dbt Wizard CLI to MCP servers to give it more tools and context."
sidebar_label: "Use MCP servers"
tags: [AI, Wizard]
---

import WizardFeedbackCallout from '/snippets/_wizard-feedback-callout.md';

# Use MCP servers with the <Constant name="wizard"/> CLI <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

<IntroText>
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) connects <Constant name="wizard" /> to external tools and context. Add an MCP server and <Constant name="wizard"/> can call its tools mid-session &mdash; query the dbt MCP server for governed project metadata, open a pull request through the GitHub MCP server, or pull in any other MCP-compatible service.
</IntroText>

<WizardFeedbackCallout />

For background on MCP itself, refer to the [Model Context Protocol introduction](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction). For the dbt-maintained server specifically, refer to the [dbt MCP server](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

## Why use an MCP server

> <Constant name="wizard"/> natively understands your dbt project, and having an MCP server extends that reach to the other tools and systems your work depends on, so you can do more without leaving your session. Each server you add gives <Constant name="wizard"/> a new set of tools it can call on your behalf. For example:

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should expand on what we mean by "session." or add a hover definition? Do we specifically mean our session chat with the dbt Wizard?

Reviewer 2: OOh or we could link to this which I just found! https://docs-getdbt-com-git-update-wizard-mcp-dbt-labs.vercel.app/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-how-it-works?version=2.0#sessions

> <Constant name="wizard"/> natively understands your dbt project, and having an MCP server extends that reach to the other tools and systems your work depends on, so you can do more without leaving your session. Each server you add gives <Constant name="wizard"/> a new set of tools it can call on your behalf. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
<Constant name="wizard"/> natively understands your dbt project, and having an MCP server extends that reach to the other tools and systems your work depends on, so you can do more without leaving your [session](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-how-it-works#sessions). Each server you add gives <Constant name="wizard"/> a new set of tools it can call on your behalf. For example:
```

- dbt MCP server for governed access to your models, metrics, and lineage.
- GitHub server to read and review pull requests.

> - Data warehouse or other server to pull in context that lives outside dbt.

Reviewer 2: Should we say "data warehouse server?"

:::info MCP servers are a CLI feature
Configuring MCP servers is available only in the <Constant name="wizard" /> CLI. Although you're not able to configure your own MCP servers in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> (<Constant name="studio_ide" /> and the home app), <Constant name="wizard" /> includes a built-in set of dbt tools such as dbt Agent skill and dbt MCP's product documentation fetching.
:::

## Supported MCP server types

<Constant name="wizard" /> supports two transports:

<SimpleTable>

| Type | Description |
|------|-------------|
| STDIO server (standard input/output, a server that runs as a program on your own computer, instead of one you connect to over the internet) | Runs as a local process that <Constant name="wizard"/> starts with a command (for example, `npx` or `uvx`). Supports environment variables. |
| Streamable HTTP server | A server you reach at a URL. Supports bearer-token and OAuth authentication. |

</SimpleTable>

:::note Server instructions
For either transport, <Constant name="wizard"/> reads the `instructions` field a server returns during initialization and uses it as cross-tool guidance.
:::

## Add an MCP server

> Use the `wizard mcp add` command, or edit `~/.dbt/wizard/config.toml` directly. Both write to the same `[mcp_servers.NAME]` configuration.

Reviewer 2: I thinkyou're saying we can use either / or right?
```suggestion
Use the `wizard mcp add` command, or edit `~/.dbt/wizard/config.toml` directly. Either one will write to the same `[mcp_servers.NAME]` configuration.
```

> **Add a STDIO server:**

Reviewer 2: What do you think about making this a subheading?

```bash
wizard mcp add SERVER_NAME --env VAR1=value1 -- COMMAND ARGS
```

For example, to add a filesystem MCP server that runs locally through `npx`:

```bash

> wizard mcp add filesystem -- npx -y @modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem /path/to/project

Reviewer 2: is it intentional that there's a space between `--` and `npx`?

I'm trying to correlate the line 59 with line 65 and it doesn't feel like a clear correlation: 

I'm guessing that "filesystem" is a type of SERVER_NAME that you'd use locally? Do we show somewhere what other server names might be? 
The example doesn't anything for VAR1, right?

Author: yes it is and added a bit more explanation on this. test result:
```
transport: stdio
command: npx
args: -y @modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem /path/to/project
```

```

To connect the [dbt MCP server](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp), use the streamable HTTP form below — refer to [dbt MCP server](#dbt-mcp-server) under Examples.

> **Add a streamable HTTP server:**

Reviewer 2: H3 here too?

```bash
wizard mcp add SERVER_NAME --url https://example.com/mcp --bearer-token-env-var MY_TOKEN
```

To see all MCP subcommands, run `wizard mcp --help`. For the full list of flags, refer to the [CLI command reference](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-cli-reference).

> **Or edit `config.toml` directly.** <Constant name="wizard"/> stores MCP configuration in `~/.dbt/wizard/config.toml` alongside its other settings:

Reviewer 2: Also H3?

| `oauth.client_id` | HTTP | OAuth client identifier presented during authorization and token exchange. |
| `oauth_resource` | HTTP | OAuth resource parameter to include in login requests ([RFC 8707](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8707)). |
| `enabled` | Both | Whether the server is active. Defaults to `true`. |
| `required` | Both | When `true`, `wizard exec` errors if this server fails to initialize. |
| `enabled_tools` | Both | Allowlist of tool names to expose from the server. |
| `disabled_tools` | Both | Blocklist of tool names to hide from the server. |
| `default_tools_approval_mode` | Both | Default approval mode for this server's tools: `prompt` (ask before each call) or `auto`/`approve` (run without asking, which behave the same). |
| `startup_timeout_sec` | Both | How long to wait for the server to start and list its tools. |
| `tool_timeout_sec` | Both | How long to wait for an individual tool call. |

</SimpleTable>

Set per-tool approvals with a `[mcp_servers.NAME.tools.TOOL_NAME]` block and an `approval_mode` of `auto`, `prompt`, or `approve`:

```toml
[mcp_servers.github.tools.create_pull_request]
approval_mode = "approve"
```

## Authenticate a server

> For streamable HTTP servers that use OAuth, authenticate from the CLI:

Reviewer 2: Is this saying that you need to auth from the CLI if you have a streamable MCP server? Or is it if you want to type of thing? If it's required, we should say it.

```bash
wizard mcp login SERVER_NAME
wizard mcp logout SERVER_NAME
```

> To request specific scopes at login, pass the `--scopes` (comma-separated) CLI flag, which is the same as setting `scopes` in `config.toml`:

Author: ```suggestion
To request specific scopes at login, pass the `--scopes` CLI flag with a comma-separated list. This requests the same scopes as the scopes key in `config.toml`, but just for that login:
```

```bash
wizard mcp login SERVER_NAME --scopes read,write
```

For servers that use a static token, set `bearer_token_env_var` to the name of an environment variable holding the token, and export that variable before starting `wizard`.

## Manage MCP servers (CLI)

> Inspecting and removing servers is done through the <Constant name="wizard" /> CLI:

Reviewer 2: Is this required/the only way to manage the mcp servers? if so, we should say that.

<SimpleTable>

| Command | What it does |
|---------|-------------|
| `wizard mcp list` | List configured MCP servers. Add `--json` for machine-readable output. |
| `wizard mcp get NAME` | Show the configuration for one server. |
| `wizard mcp add NAME ...` | Add a STDIO or streamable HTTP server. |
| `wizard mcp remove NAME` | Remove a server's configuration. |
| `wizard mcp login NAME` | Authenticate with an OAuth server. |
| `wizard mcp logout NAME` | Sign out of an OAuth server. |

</SimpleTable>

## Approvals and tool permissions

> MCP tool calls follow the same [approval and sandboxing](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-how-it-works#approval-and-sandboxing) rules as the rest of <Constant name="wizard" />. Use `enabled_tools` and `disabled_tools` to control which tools a server exposes, so <Constant name="wizard"/> can only call the ones you intend.

Reviewer 2: Do I use enabled_tools and disabled_tools on the CLI?

Author: good shout, this is for the file only, not flags!
